


In testing the full functionality of this writing environment, I quickly wrote up this *formualic* derivation of the Black-Scholes model which I'll decide to keep here.


## Introduction


The Black-Scholes-Merton model, often just shortened to *Black-Scholes*, aims to give the fair price of a European call option given the dynamic movement of the underlying stock. The overarching idea is to construct a PDE that must under no-arbitrage, and then use the structure/assumptions of the option to solve the PDE. Really nicely, the same PDE that describes the diffusion of heat is the same  PDE that describes the evolution of the no-arbitrage portfolio. Because of this, the derivation from 
$$
\frac{\partial V}{\partial t} + \frac{1}{2} \sigma^2 S^2 \frac{\partial^2 V}{\partial S^2} + rS\frac{\partial V}{\partial S} - rV = 0,
$$ where $V_T = (S_T - K)^+ $, $\lim_{S \to \infty} V_t = S- K$, and $V_t|_{S = 0} =0$, 
to Black-Scholes 
$$
V_t = \Phi (d_1) S_t - \Phi (d_2) Ke^{-r(T-t)},
$$
where
$$
d_1 = \frac{\ln(\frac{S_t}{K}) + (r+\frac{1}{2} \sigma^2) (T-t)}{\sigma \sqrt{T-t}}
$$
$$
d_2 = \frac{\ln(\frac{S_t}{K}) + (r-\frac{1}{2} \sigma^2) (T-t)}{\sigma \sqrt{T-t}} = d_1 - \sigma \sqrt{T-t}
$$ a bit more straightfoward. 


### Setup

So we want to price an option whose value at time $t$ is $V_t$. The option determined by the expiration date, $T$, a strike price $K$, and underlying stock whose price at time $t$ is $S_t$. The option is then defined by its payoff at expiry, $V_T = \max (S_T - K, 0) := (S_T- K)^+$. Note that we're setting this up for call options, but put options will follow almost exact same logic. 


## Derivation of Black Scholes 

Recall that a random variable $X$ is *log-normally distributed* if for some normally distributed variable $Y$, we have $X = e^Y$, i.e. $\log X$ is normally distributed. The *forward price of a stock* is the current prouce of the stock, $S_0$, plus an expected return which will exactly offset the price of holding the stock over a period of time $t$. The only cost of holding the stock in our case is the loss of the risk-free interest, so the forward price is $$S_0 e^{rt}$$ where $r$ is the risk-free interest rate. 

We say that a universe is *risk-neutral* if for all assets $A$ and time periods $t$, the value of the asset $C(A, 0)$ at $t=0$ is the expected value of the asset at time $t$ discounted to its present value using the risk-free rate, i.e. $C(A, 0) = e^{-rt} \mathbb E[C(A,t)]$ where $r$ is the continuously compounded risk-free interest rate. 


*Lemma.* Let $S_t$ a stock price index by time $t$, and write $\nu$ to be the annual volatility in the percent change in the stock price. Assume $S_t$ is log-normally distributed, i.e. $\log \left( \frac{S_t}{S_0}\right) $ is normally distributed with mean $\mu$ and variance $\sigma$, and let the mean of the log-normal distribution be located at the forward price of the stock. Then: $\mu = \mu (t)$, $\sigma = \sigma(t)$, and $\sigma = \nu^2 t$ with $\mu = \left  ( r - \frac{\nu^2}{2}\right) t$.